# Toric via symmetry
This repository hosts the codes and and necessary computational results supporting the upcoming paper titled _Symmetry Lie Algebras of Varieties with Applications to Algebraic Statistics_.

SageMath version 10.3, Release Date: 2024-03-19                    │
Using Python 3.11.8. Type "help()" for help.     

The implimentation of the key algorithm in the paper can be found in the file `Symmalg.sage`. Some examples of the how to use the code can be found in `Test_notebook.ipynb` and `Toricideal.ipynb`.

In the above mentioned paper we disprove a conjecture. The computation for that can be found in the notebook `ToricIdeal_9x9_conjecture_disproved.ipynb`.

## Documentation
`symmalg(generators, n = 0)`

This is our main function, implemented in `Symmalg.sage`.
Computes the symmetry Lie algebra of an ideal generated by the given polynomials.
    
    This function takes a list of polynomial generators defining an ideal and computes its symmetry Lie algebra.
    It constructs a polynomial ring, determines an appropriate basis, and applies a homomorphism to obtain the 
    symmetry Lie algebra.

    Parameters:
    ----------
    generators : list
        A list of polynomial generators defining the ideal.
    n : int, optional (default=0)
        The number of variables in the ambient polynomial ring. If not specified (n=0), 
        it is inferred from the first generator.

    Returns:
    -------
    LieI : Lie algebra object
        The computed symmetry Lie algebra of the given ideal.

    Notes:
    ------
    - If `n` is not provided, the number of variables is inferred from the first generator.
    - Constructs a polynomial ring over the rationals.
    - Expands the generators into a basis by multiplying with monomials of appropriate degree.
    - Uses row reduction on the matrix representation of the expanded generators.
    - Calls `symmalg_homo` to finalize the Lie algebra structure.

`rank_poly(M)`

This is another very useful function. We used it at various places in our implementation.

    This function takes a matrix "M" with polynomial entries as input,
    and substitutes random values for the variables and then computes the rank of the matrix.
    Then this function returns the found rank.

### Example 1

Initiate the ring and inject the variables
```
R = PolynomialRing(QQ,['x', 'y','z'])
R.inject_variables()
```
Compute the symmetry lie algebra
```
start_time = time.time()
LieI = symmalg([x^2+y^2+z^2],3)
end_time = time.time()
comp_time = end_time - start_time # Compute the elapsed time

minutes = int(comp_time // 60)
seconds = comp_time % 60

formatted_time_str = f"{minutes} min {seconds:.2f} sec"

print(f"\nComputation Time: {formatted_time_str}")
```

